Update existing evaluation pages (#1180)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/model_evaluation/evaluation_on_gadi/esmvaltool_workflow.md

# ESMValTool on Gadi

## What is ESMValTool?

The Earth System Model Evaluation Tool (ESMValTool) is a tool developed for evaluation of Earth System Models in CMIP (Climate Model Intercomparison Projects). It allows for routine comparison of single or multiple models, either against predecessor versions or against observations. ESMValTool is a community-developed climate model diagnostics and evaluation software package, driven both by computational performance and scientific accuracy and reproducibility. It is open to both users and developers, encouraging open exchange of diagnostic source code and evaluation results from the CMIP ensemble of models. 

For more information, refer to the official [ESMValTool documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest).

!!! note 
    ACCESS-NRI is supporting a Gadi-specific configuration of ESMValTool via the [_conda/analysis3_](/getting_started/environments) environment. 

>     It includes the [ESMValTool](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool) and [ESMValCore](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValCore) Python packages, with the [ESMValTool collection of recipes and diagnostics](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/recipes/index.html). It is configured to use the existing NCI supported CMIP data collections and [Replicated observational datasets](https://geonetwork.nci.org.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/catalog.search#/metadata/f0550_0998_4567_4139). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It includes the [ESMValTool](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool) and [ESMValCore](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValCore) Python packages, with the [ESMValTool collection of recipes and diagnostics](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/recipes/index.html). It is configured to use the existing NCI-supported CMIP data collections and [Replicated observational datasets](https://geonetwork.nci.org.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/catalog.search#/metadata/f0550_0998_4567_4139). 
```

ACCESS-NRI is a member of the [ESMValTool Consortium](https://esmvaltool.org/2024-12-11-Consortium_agreement/) and is contributing to the development of the tool for the Australian climate community.

## Using ESMValTool on Gadi

> ### Pre-requisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites
```

> _ESMValTool_ is provided through the [xp65](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join) project on Gadi via the _analysis3_ environment. To enable the _analysis3_ environment, you need to be a member of the _xp65_ NCI project.

Reviewer: I think this section should go to the following paragraph, not here in the prerequisites. 
Here I would just tell users to join the `xp65` project and to have an NCI account.

Please copy the same format/text from https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-Hive-Docs/blob/5c1c563ed337a6f8e2d176c7ab522407bbb7cb97/docs/models/run_a_model/run_access-om3.md?plain=1#L39

Author: ```suggestion
- Have an [NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account)
- Join the [xp65](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join) project for the [_conda/analysis3_](/getting_started/environments) environment.
```

Depending on your needs, you may want to also join the following supported data collections:

- CMIP6: [fs38](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/fs38/join), [oi10](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/oi10/join)
- CMIP5: [rr3](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/rr3/join), [al33](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/al33/join)
- Observation data collection: [ct11](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/ct11/join)
- ERA5 and ERA5-Land: [rt52](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/rt52/join), [zz93](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/zz93/join)
- obs4MIPs: [qv56](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/qv56/join)

> ### Loading the _analysis3_ module

Reviewer: I see mentions of PBS jobs, but there is no suggestion that tells user to run ESMValTool within PBS jobs (and the reason this is a preferred option). I would add it here:
```suggestion

_ESMValTool_ recipes should be run as a script within a [PBS job](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS).

### Loading the _analysis3_ module
```

Author: ```suggestion
###  Using ESMValTool in a PBS job

_ESMValTool_ YAML recipes should be run as a script within a [PBS job](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS).
```

> ### Loading the _analysis3_ module

Reviewer: I think the main message is to "get" or enable `esmvaltool` command, therefore I would change this paragraph's name and then add context: 
````suggestion
### Enable esmvaltool

_ESMValTool_ is provided on _Gadi_ within the `conda/analysis3` environment. To be able to use the `esmvaltool` command, load the the `conda/analysis3` environment by running:

```
module use /g/data/vk83/public/modules
module load conda/analysis3
```

For further information on the `conda/analysis3` environment, refer to [conda/analysis3 Python Environment](/getting_started/environments).
````

> See [use the environment in a pbs job](/getting_started/environments#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job) which you can use to set up a _pbs_ job to run a recipe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: ````suggestion
_ESMValTool_ is provided on _Gadi_ within the `conda/analysis3` environment.
See [use the environment in a pbs job](/getting_started/environments#use-the-environment-within-a-pbs-job) which you can use to set up a _pbs_ job to run a recipe.

To be able to use the `esmvaltool` command, load the the `conda/analysis3` environment by adding:
```
module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
module load conda/analysis3
```

````

> Within the _pbs_ job script you can use the `run` command to run a recipe:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the PBS job script you can use the `run` command to run a recipe:
```

```
esmvaltool run examples/recipe_python.yml
```
See the [ESMValTool running documentation page](http://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/run.html) for more information.

Use the following commands in the _pbs_ job or manually to use the `esmvaltool` commands including the `config` commands:
```
module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
module load conda/analysis3
```

This environment is pre-configured to access CMIP and observation datasets available on Gadi. For more information on configuration see the [ESMValTool documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#).

By default from version 2.12, ESMValTool looks for the configuration files in the home directory, inside the `~/.config/esmvaltool` folder.
To start, you can get a copy of user configuration file in your default folder, run the following.

```

> esmvaltool config copy defaults/config-user.yml

Reviewer: This mentions the `esmvaltool run` command, but below a reference to the `config` command is shown. 

I think these examples should not be in this paragraph (which is about "enabling" the esmvaltool command).

Since there is already a paragraph about using ESMValCore API in a jupyter notebook, I would have a similar paragraph of using ESMValTool in a PBS job.

```

### Using ESMValCore API in a Jupyter notebook

> While ESMValTool is used as a term to include both ESMValTool and ESMValCore packages together, they are separate packages. ESMValCore is the software package which provides the core functionality for ESMValTool, finding CMIP data and apply commonly used preprocessing functions. ESMValCore can be used without ESMValTool, this can be shown in a Jupyter notebook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While _ESMValTool_ is used as a term to include both _ESMValTool_ and _ESMValCore_ packages together, they are separate packages. _ESMValCore_ is the software package which provides the core functionality for _ESMValTool_, such as finding CMIP data and applying commonly-used preprocessing functions, and can be used without _ESMValTool_. 

The example below shows how to use _ESMValCore_ API within a Jupyter notebook.
```

#### Start an ARE session

> To get started follow the guide on [using the environment in ARE](/getting_started/environments#use-the-environment-within-are) to start an ARE session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start an [ARE Jupyterlab](/getting_started/are/#jupyterlab) session with the [additional settings required by the conda/analysis3 environment](/getting_started/environments#use-the-environment-within-are).
```

#### Find and load datasets 

> You can find available datasets with the `'*'` wildcard, the example below finds all available ensemble members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find available datasets with the `'*'` wildcard. The example below finds all available ensemble members:
```

``` python
from esmvalcore.dataset import Dataset
dataset_search = Dataset(
    short_name='tos',
    mip='Omon',
    project='CMIP6',
    exp='historical',
    dataset='ACCESS-ESM1-5',
    ensemble='*',
    grid='gn',
)
ensemble_datasets = list(dataset_search.from_files())

print([ds['ensemble'] for ds in ensemble_datasets])
```

> You can load the dataset you are interested in with `.load()` in the example below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To load the desired dataset you can use the `.load()` method:
```

```python
dataset = ensemble_datasets[0]
cube = dataset.load()
```

#### Custom configuration

You can load your own saved configuration from your configuration folder with the below code.
You may have different configurations to find your own data in other locations.
For more information on configuration see the [configure documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#).

``` python
from esmvalcore.config import CFG

> CFG.load_from_dirs(['/<USER>/.config/esmvaltool'])

Reviewer: ````suggestion
To load your own custom configuration from your esmvaltool configuration folder you can use:
``` python
from esmvalcore.config import CFG
import os

USER=os.environ["USER"]
CFG.load_from_dirs([f'/{USER}/.config/esmvaltool'])
```

For more information on configuration see [ESMValCore configure documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#).
````

```

#### ESMValCore preprocessors
You can take advantage of the built in commonly used preprocessors. 
See the [API reference](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/api/esmvalcore.preprocessor.html#) for using the preprocessors.
The below example shows finding the monthly anomalies and the annual mean.
```python
from esmvalcore.preprocessor import annual_statistics, anomalies

# Set the reference period for anomalies 
reference_period = {
    "start_year": 1950, "start_month": 1, "start_day": 1,
    "end_year": 1979, "end_month": 12, "end_day": 31,
}

cube = anomalies(cube, reference=reference_period, period='month')
cube = annual_statistics(cube, operator='mean')
```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
You can take advantage of built-in preprocessors. 

The example below shows how to find the monthly anomalies and the annual mean of a dataset:
```python
from esmvalcore.preprocessor import annual_statistics, anomalies

# Set the reference period for anomalies 
reference_period = {
    "start_year": 1950, "start_month": 1, "start_day": 1,
    "end_year": 1979, "end_month": 12, "end_day": 31,
}

cube = anomalies(cube, reference=reference_period, period='month')
cube = annual_statistics(cube, operator='mean')
```

See the [API reference](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/api/esmvalcore.preprocessor.html#) for further information on using preprocessors.
````

### Tutorials 
For tutorial series and material from previous workshops see:
<div class="card-container">
    <a href="/tutorials/esmvaltool" target="_blank" class="vertical-card aspect-ratio2to1">
        <div class="card-image-container">
            <img src="/assets/model_evaluation/logo_esmvaltool.png" alt="ESMValTool" class="img-cover"></img>
        </div>
        <div class="card-text-container bold">Tutorials</div>
    </a>

> </div>

Reviewer: I am not in favor of using cards like this.
Cards should be self-explanatory, meaning they wouldn't require a title and description (if you need a description you might want to use a horizontal card that embeds a description in it). 

Therefore, I would suggest turning this to a normal link

```suggestion
For tutorial series and material from previous workshops see [ESMValTool Tutorials](/tutorials/esmvaltool).
```

> ## ESMValTool recipe examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ESMValTool example recipes
```

<!-- Explain what the Tiers mean: Tier3 not to be distributed / license issue, Tier2: some restrictions, but can be redistributed while citing papers etc., Tier1: open for everyone -->

> Some example recipes are provided below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some _ESMValTool_ example recipes are provided below:
```

To be able to use the `esmvaltool` command, load the `conda/analysis3` environment by adding:
```
module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
module load conda/analysis3
```

Within the _pbs_ job script you can use the `run` command to run a recipe:
```
esmvaltool run examples/recipe_python.yml
```
See the [ESMValTool running documentation page](http://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/run.html) for more information.

### Using ESMValCore API in a Jupyter notebook

While _ESMValTool_ is used as a term to include both _ESMValTool_ and _ESMValCore_ packages together, they are separate packages. _ESMValCore_ is the software package which provides the core functionality for _ESMValTool_, such as finding CMIP data and applying commonly-used preprocessing functions, and can be used without _ESMValTool_. 

The example below shows how to use _ESMValCore_ API within a Jupyter notebook.

#### Start an ARE session
Start an [ARE Jupyterlab](/getting_started/are/#jupyterlab) session with the [additional settings required by the conda/analysis3 environment](/getting_started/environments#use-the-environment-within-are).

#### Find and load datasets 

> You can find available datasets with the `'*'` wildcard. The example below finds all available ensemble members:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below finds all available ensemble members for a specific model experiment. The `'*'` wildcard is used to find all available entries for the specified filter (`ensemble`).
```

Question: is `enseble` a needed parameter for the `Dataset` class?
If not, what's the difference of setting `ensemble='*'` or not setting it at all?
```
dataset_search = Dataset(
    short_name='tos',
    mip='Omon',
    project='CMIP6',
    exp='historical',
    dataset='ACCESS-ESM1-5',
    grid='gn',
)
```

Author: yes ensemble is required for CMIP data, the wildcard will find all the ensemble members, or users can put in a specific ensemble. the required parameters can be different for different dataset projects, it's probably best not to go too much into everything as it would be hard to cover it all.

Reviewer: Thank you for the clarification. 
Yes totally, I agree we shouldn't be too specific. I was just curious.

``` python
from esmvalcore.dataset import Dataset
dataset_search = Dataset(
    short_name='tos',
    mip='Omon',
    project='CMIP6',
    exp='historical',
    dataset='ACCESS-ESM1-5',
    ensemble='*',
    grid='gn',
)
ensemble_datasets = list(dataset_search.from_files())

print([ds['ensemble'] for ds in ensemble_datasets])
```

To load the desired dataset you can use the `.load()` method:

```python
dataset = ensemble_datasets[0]
cube = dataset.load()
```

#### ESMValCore preprocessors
You can take advantage of built-in preprocessors. 

The example below shows how to find the monthly anomalies and the annual mean of a dataset:
```python
from esmvalcore.preprocessor import annual_statistics, anomalies

# Set the reference period for anomalies 
reference_period = {
    "start_year": 1950, "start_month": 1, "start_day": 1,
    "end_year": 1979, "end_month": 12, "end_day": 31,
}

cube = anomalies(cube, reference=reference_period, period='month')
cube = annual_statistics(cube, operator='mean')
```

See the [API reference](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/api/esmvalcore.preprocessor.html#) for further information on using preprocessors.

> ### Custom configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Custom ESMValTool configuration
```

> By default from version 2.12, ESMValTool looks for the configuration files in the home directory, inside the `~/.config/esmvaltool` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From version `2.12`, _ESMValTool_ looks for its configuration files in the directory `~/.config/esmvaltool`.
```

To start, you can get a copy of user configuration file in your default folder.
Use the `esmvaltool config` commands from the _conda/analysis3_ environment with the following.

```
module use /g/data/xp65/public/modules
module load conda/analysis3

> esmvaltool config copy defaults/config-user.yml

Reviewer: ````suggestion
To copy a custom _ESMValTool_ configuration file to this default directory you can use the `esmvaltool config copy` command.<br>
For example, to copy the custom configuration `defaults/config-user.yml` to _ESMValTool_'s default directory you can run:

```
esmvaltool config copy defaults/config-user.yml
```
````

```

You can edit configuration files in your default folder to suit your needs, overwriting the default configuration in _conda/analysis3._
This environment is pre-configured to access CMIP and observation datasets available on Gadi.

> For more information on configuration see the [ESMValTool documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can edit configuration files in _ESMValTool_'s default folder to suit your needs, overwriting the default configuration used by _conda/analysis3._, which is pre-configured to access CMIP and observation datasets available on Gadi.<br>
For more information on _ESMValTool_ configuration, see the [ESMValTool documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#).
```

> To load your own custom configuration from your esmvaltool configuration folder in a Jupyter notebook you can use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To load your own custom configuration from _ESMValTool_'s configuration folder, you can use:
```

I believe this is not only valid for jupyter notebooks

Author: the example is for jupyter notebooks, using the API, we don't go into using the API in just python scripts, doesn't fit in any workflow

Reviewer: I understand, but that is just Python code so I would not mention Juptyter Notebooks here

``` python
from esmvalcore.config import CFG
import os

USER=os.environ["USER"]

> CFG.load_from_dirs([f'/{USER}/.config/esmvaltool'])

Reviewer: Are we sure about this? 

the `/$USER` directory doesn't exist on Gadi. 
Does ESMValTool prepend this directory with another path?

Author: i will remove and leave as your home directory

## Support

> To get help using ESMValTool on _Gadi_, you can ask for help on the [ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au).

Reviewer: Is there a specific (sub)category where the help should be asked?

```suggestion
For further assistance on using ESMValTool on _Gadi_, refer to the [ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au).
```

> General ESMValTool support (i.e. non-specific to _Gadi_) can be found on the [ESMValTool Discussions](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/discussions) page, where users can also post technical questions on the ESMValTool installation, application and development. There are community meetings to keep up to date on developments or ask questions to other users. These are announced on the [ESMValTool Community repository](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/Community/discussions) or you can join the [mailing list](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/introduction.html#mailing-list).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
General _ESMValTool_ support (i.e. non-specific to _Gadi_) can be found on the [ESMValTool Discussions](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/discussions) page, where users can also post technical questions on the _ESMValTool_ installation, application and development. There are community meetings to keep up to date on developments or ask questions to other users. These are announced on the [ESMValTool Community repository](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/Community/discussions). You can also join the [ESMValTool mailing list](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/introduction.html#mailing-list).
```

### Recipes and diagnostics

> Contacts for specific diagnostic sets are the authors listed in the source code and corresponding [recipe and diagnostic documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/recipes/index.html#recipes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contacts for specific diagnostic sets are listed as authors in the source code and in the corresponding [recipe and diagnostic documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/recipes/index.html#recipes).
```

### License

> The _ESMValTool_ is released under the Apache License, version 2.0. Citation of the _ESMValTool_ paper (“Software Documentation Paper”) is requested upon use, along with the software DOI for _ESMValTool_ (doi:10.5281/zenodo.3401363) and _ESMValCore_ (doi:10.5281/zenodo.3387139) together with the version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _ESMValTool_ is released under the Apache License, version 2.0.<br>
Citation of the _ESMValTool_ paper (“Software Documentation Paper”) is requested upon use, along with the software DOI for _ESMValTool_ (**doi:10.5281/zenodo.3401363**) and _ESMValCore_ (**doi:10.5281/zenodo.3387139**) together with the version:
```

> Righi, M., Andela, B., Eyring, V., Lauer, A., Predoi, V., Schlund, M., Vegas-Regidor, J., Bock, L., Brötz, B., de Mora, L., Diblen, F., Dreyer, L., Drost, N., Earnshaw, P., Hassler, B., Koldunov, N., Little, B., Loosveldt Tomas, S., and Zimmermann, K.: Earth System Model Evaluation Tool (ESMValTool) v2.0 – technical overview, Geosci. Model Dev., 13, 1179–1199, https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-13-1179-2020, 2020.

> Besides the above citation, users are asked to register any journal articles (or other scientific documents) that use the software at the [ESMValTool webpage](https://www.esmvaltool.org/). Citing the Software Documentation Paper and registering your paper(s) will serve to document the scientific impact of the Software, which is important for securing future funding. You should consider this an obligation if you have taken advantage of the _ESMValTool_, which represents the end product of considerable effort by the development team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides the above citation, users are asked to register any journal articles or other scientific documents that use the software on the [ESMValTool website](https://www.esmvaltool.org/). Citing the Software Documentation Paper and registering your papers will serve to document the scientific impact of the Software, which is important for securing future funding. You should consider this an obligation if you have taken advantage of the _ESMValTool_, which represents the end product of considerable effort by the development team.
```
